Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today's video
is the last video in the first part of this
course in the foundations of mathematics where
we're having a look at how to set up mathematics
correctly in the second part of the course
which I'm going to start with the next video
we are going to change direction in a major way
today I'm going to talk about algebraic curves
and how we can extend Newton's method to find
approximate intersections of algebraic curves
and we're going to look at one particular
example so there's an underlying question
here well what exactly is an algebraic curve
and for us the answer is that it's basically
a bi poly number P say depending on alpha and
beta again we'll have a look at two particular
algebraic curves the firma curve which looks
like this perhaps x cubed plus y cubed equals
one is the traditional Cartesian equation for
it studied by firma very important curve and the
second curve is the lemniscate of Bernoulli an
even more important curve investigated by Jacob
Bernoulli looks like this and it has equation
x squared plus y squared all squared equals 2x
squared minus y squared again in Cartesian
coordinates now you can see from these two
pictures that the red Vermont curve and the blue
lemniscate meet at these two points now those are
the only two points of where they meet and so a
natural question is well can we find out where
those two points are algebraically it means
solving these two equations simultaneously
which is rather a challenging thing to do and in
fact you can't do it over the rational numbers in
fact over the rational numbers the firma curve
itself is already very difficult to get ahold
of in this form because firma himself proved that
the only irrational points on this curve are the
two places where it meets the x and y axis at 1 0
and 0 1 there are no other rational numbers x and
y that satisfy that equation but nevertheless
we'll see that there is a approximate version
of this question so we can find approximate
points here and here that lie approximately
on this curve in a sense that they almost satisfy
this equation and they lie approximately on this
curve in the sense that they almost satisfy this
equation and that's what we're going to be after
that's what Newton's method allows us to find
it allows us to find an approximate solution to
an equation which in practice is all that we can
expect and hope for and all that we often need so
let's start by having a look at the firma curve
x cubed plus y cubed equals 1 the associated by
pali number is this one here minus 1 plus alpha
cubed plus beta cubed where alpha is playing the
role of x and beta is playing the role of y so
this fits into our poly number framework which
is a very explicit and computationally simple way
of dealing with polynomials now when we talked
about by Pauli numbers like this sometime ago I
told you that there were a number of different
interpretations of such a poly number there are
different ways of visualizing or imagining what
this expression represents and I explained that
we have to sometimes have a flexible attitude as
to what interpretation we're going to be using
so one interpretation of such a Pauline of is
interpretation a where we interpret it as a
curve P of X y equals zero so in other words
we're setting the equation or expression equal
to zero and looking to see where we can have
some solutions in the plane that's where we get
the familiar equation x cubed plus y cubed equals
1 from and that's where this picture comes from
this is a curve in the plane at least we can see
it and what we're really graphing here are not
points that exactly satisfy this equation but
points which approximately satisfy this equation
so this is a picture of rational numbers all kinds
of rational numbers x and y such that x cubed
plus y cubed is pretty close to 1 and pretty
close is variable depending on your computer
program depending on the resolution that you
want to obtain it's a curve it's a two-dimensional
picture then there's also interpretation B which
is different we take the expression now and we
create from it a surface by essentially looking
at this equation by introducing a third variable
Z and thinking about the surface Z equals P of XY
so for any two values X and y we can compute P of
XY that's a number and then that's going to give
us the height above the point XY that the surface
lies on so here's our three-dimensional picture at
least a two-dimensional representation of it the
x-direction coming out at us the y-direction in
the board the z direction in the board so the XY
plane that was visualized over here in this way
is now visualized lying horizontally with the x
axis coming out at us here and the y axis there
so what was the curve over here is now this red
curve that you see lying on the horrors until
xy-plane but that's only a part of the object over
here the object is actually the surface itself and
that's a surface in space as it turns out if you
look at it in this form Z equals X cubed plus y
cubed minus one if you go in the positive x in
the positive y-direction the surface is coming
up in other words the Z coordinate is increasing
while if x and y are negative so we're going in
that direction then these terms will become
negative and the Zed cordons going down in
these sort of 45-degree directions here roughly
the X and the y terms will balance themselves out
and the Zed value will be pretty close to zero
so it's a little bit of a hard thing to imagine
but you could roughly visualize this surface in
the following way that if you're sitting at the
origin and you have your back to the positive
quadrant so the back to the X and y directions
where they're going positive then it's almost
like you could sit there with your back against
the surface and your feet hanging over the edge
where the surface goes down you could have your
arms stretched out in these directions here and
the surface would be more or less horizontal
there and the curve that's visualized here is
just the places where that surface cuts the XY
plane or where it approximately cuts the XY plane
so admittedly it's more difficult to visualize
but there's an important way in which this picture
is simpler than this one and that is that this is
actually a function in the sense that if you given
any value of x and any value of Y you just compute
the value of Z to find a point on the surface so
we can find lots of points on the surface very
easily because this is just an equation that can
easily be used to generate triples that Y&Z on
the other hand this picture while two-dimensional
is harder and more conceptually difficult because
we can't actually find points which satisfy this
relation so easily exactly so we'll see that for
the the problem of the meat of the Vermont curve
of the lemniscate this picture here is the one
that helps us apply Newton's method successfully
so let's use the ideas of the algebraic calculus
that I've set up so far to deal with poly
numbers to analyze this Fermont curve in
particular to get some tangent line or tangent
plane to it so we're after the tangent plane to
the Thurmont curve and you might want to review
math foundation 78 where we dealt with a simpler
situation of the unit circle so we're going to
be doing the same thing here that we did for
the unit circle so you might want to review that
simpler situation first there is our poly number
minus 1 plus alpha cubed plus beta cubed first
order of business to find a Taylor polynomial
alpha with alpha plus R and beta with beta
plus s so we get this expression then we
expand out using the binomial theorem you
can check that we get all those terms and
they are then written in increasing powers
of alpha and beta constant term alpha beta
alpha squared beta squared and alpha cubed beta
cubed terms and now what we do is we essentially
go back to the original Pauline umber by in this
expression here replacing alpha with alpha minus
R and beta with beta minus s that gives us
P of alpha beta equals that exactly the same
expression with the Alpha replace with alpha
minus R and the beta replaced with beta minus s
this expression is the Taylor expansion of P
at the point RS it's a rewriting of the poly
number in powers of alpha minus R and beta minus s
instead of in powers of alpha and beta now what we
can do with this expression is we can read off the
various tangents to this by poly number and the
one that we're interested in is the first tangent
what we get when we just go up to the linear
terms and disregard the higher terms so we're just
going up to there and copying that again there it
is right there we can simplify that by expanding
these things out combining here now we get minus 1
minus 2 R cubed minus 2 s cubed constant term plus
3 R squared alpha plus 3 s squared beta that's
the first tangent to P at the point R s and we'll
interpret that as the tangent plane to peak at the
point R s an important point to emphasize to you
is that we have not done anything other than high
school algebra very simple manipulations to get
our tangent our first tangent no limits have been
involved and no real numbers have been involved
and in fact we've avoided even the idea of a
derivative it's been very simple so there are two
interpretations of this by poly number one is as a
tangent line of some kind in the XY plane another
is as a tangent plane in the XYZ space let's think
about the interpretation be first because that's
the one that's gonna be more important for us at
least to orient ourselves we've talked about the
surface determined by the original Fermat curve
and now we have a point RS in the XY plane so it
is in the horizontal plane and above this point
or below it perhaps depending on where you are
in this case above this point there will be a
point on the surface and that surface is inclined
at a certain way above the point RS and there's a
tangent plane to the surface at that point and
it's that tangent plane to the surface at the
point above RS that we are calculating here this
if we set it equal to Z is a linear equation in x
y&z that represents a plane in three-dimensional
space which is exactly the tangent to the surface
another interpretation of this by Paulo number
is to set it equal to zero then we get something
that lies only in the XY plane and that's
exactly just the meat of this tangent plane in
three-dimensional space with the XY plane so in
this picture I've represented the tangent plane
by this green parallelogram there that represents
the tangent plane and where it cuts the XY plane
I represented that by this line in red so if you
have a two-dimensional point of view you say that
this thing represents this red line in the XY
plane if you have a three-dimensional point of
view you could say that this represents
the tangent plane to the surface in the
3-dimensional space now let's turn our attention
to the lemniscate of Bernoulli which was one of
the most important curves introduced into the
17th century and played a very important role in
the development of mathematics especially in the
direction of elliptic curves and lifting integrals
a little bit of that story is described in my math
history 40 lecture which I actually have quite
posted yet all right so here's the 11 of Skater
Bernoulli it's like a figure eight and in fact
it's the symbol for infinity the is commonly
used that was introduced by Wallace and this
equation arises in a very nice geometrical way as
the equation satisfied by a point X such that the
product of its quadrants is to the point F 1 and
the point F 2 is equal to 1 so f 1 is the point
on the x axis with coordinate 1 F 2 is the point
with coordinates 1 we're looking at some variable
point X and we're looking at this quadrants times
this quadrants equaling 1 that condition maps out
this lemniscate if you can't remember what
quadrants is well shame on you then you need
to go back to the geometry section of this series
and remind yourself about that important notion so
also an oval of cassini this is because this kind
of condition was generalized to have more general
value here and you get more general ovals this is
a special case the lemniscate is also associated
to a torus or a doughnut if you have a circle
which revolves around like this so that that
diameter is the same as that diameter and you get
a torus and if you slice that torus with a plane
exactly a tangent plane to a point in the interior
of this inner circle then the cross-section that
you get is a lemniscate all right so we can take
this equation in x and y bring all the terms to
one side if we like replace x with alpha y with
beta and we get an associated by poly number minus
2 alpha squared plus two betas squared plus alpha
to the fourth plus 2 alpha squared beta squared
plus beta to the fourth that's a bi poly number
that captures all this geometrical stuff and we
can work algebraically with it so our aim now is
to find the first tangent to this thing ok so the
first thing that we do we calculate the Tayler
Pauline umber by replacing alpha with alpha plus
R and beta with beta plus s and there's what we
get and now we're going to write that out we're
gonna expand that out in powers of alpha and beta
and because we're interested in the tangent line
or the tangent plane essentially the first tangent
to this poly number we're not going to do all of
the work we're only going to go up to the linear
terms and alpha and beta the rest actually we
don't care about for this particular application
so we can save ourselves a lot of work so we're
just expanding this out and looking for the terms
that don't involve any alphas and betas that's
those ones there and then the ones involving alpha
we've grouped together the ones involving beta we
grouped together so for example this term for
s cube beta where does that come from it comes
from this expression here when we expand that out
with the binomial theorem we're going to get for
s cubed times beta that's where we get that term
from and similarly for these other terms then how
do we get the tangent plane or the first tangent
to P at RS we take the linear part of this taylor
by poly number disregard all the quadratic and
higher terms and replace the alpha with alpha
minus R and the beta with beta minus s so exactly
what I'm doing here I'm copying that that's copied
there this term right here with an alpha minus
R now and this term with a beta minus s and then
now we write this out expand it out put it in
the standard form and I'm going to rewrite it
with instead of alphas and betas X's and Y's
instead of alpha and beta okay so you check
my algebra there that I've expanded this out and
rearranged it in a in a pleasant way and it just
simplified a little bit to make it a little bit
more pleasant so what is this is the first tangent
to the bipolar number it represents our tangent
plane to the surface of the lemniscate so let's
put these two pictures together and we're
going to do it on a two-dimensional picture
because drawing a three-dimensional picture
and imagining those surfaces and drawing them
accurately is well something that requires too
much work the two-dimensional picture we can deal
with very easily but we're going to think three
dimensionally alright so there's our Fermanagh
curve there's our lemniscate and here are the
equations of the first tangents to the Fermata
curve and to the lebanon skate for a point RS
that was the one for the vermont curve with R's
and s is involved otherwise linear in x and y and
here is the expression for the lemniscates tangent
also involving R and s at linear in X and y now to
focus our minds let's choose a particular point RS
I don't use this point right here two one two in
the X direction one in the Y direction there it
is right there we're going to look at the tangent
planes to these two surfaces at this point here
well what we do is we replace R with two and
s with one in both of these equations now in
terms of the tangent planes remember the surface
for the Fermont curve is something that lies over
this two-dimensional picture and it's a surface
that goes up if say this is the Z direction now
and I'm gonna use the plane of the board as the
XY plane it's a surface that it's going up as we
increase X&Y and lying over the point RS there
will be a tangent plane okay and that tangent
plane has equation Z equals this these are the
values that we get when we plug our equals to
and s equals one into this equation here now that
tangent plane in this three-dimensional situation
cuts cuts the XY plane in this red line that's red
line is what we get when we set this equal to zero
so we can say that this line is the tangent to the
Fermata curve at this point a 1 that's probably a
novel way of thinking for you because you're used
to curves only having tangents at points which lie
on the curves so if a1 happened to be actually
on the curve say there we would be talking about
that tangent this is a more flexible notion of
tangent which is quite useful and almost never
seen in calculus texts I recommend it to you okay
so we have a point there there's the tangent line
to the Fermont curve at that point it's where the
tangent plane of the corresponding surface comes
down and crosses the XY plane so that what's
the surface of the lemniscate look like well
it's a little bit complicated to explain without
a picture the picture is sort of - two valleys
coming down so there's a valley here in a valley
there and otherwise the the mountain kind of comes
out so as we move out here these these things
can get bigger and we get sort of oval-shaped
level curves so at this point here the surface
is going to be out here like this and there's
going to be another tangent plane to the surface
above this point and that tangent plane is going
to meet to the XY plane in this blue line and the
equation of that is obtained by taking this and
substituting R equals 2 at s equals 1 and then
setting it equal to zero and this is that line
okay so we've got these two tangent lines
corresponding to this point and if the point
actually here was pretty close to being where
these two curves meet then these two tangent
lines would be pretty close to being tangents
at the two curves and where those two tangents
meet would be a pretty good approximation to
actually where the curves meet so our strategy
is to use where the two tangents meet as our next
approximate point of intersection this is a kind
of Newton's method an iteration where we use the
tangent to determine a new point but now we have
two tangents and so we're gonna use the point
where they meet as our new point so where do
these two lines meet well you need to solve these
two equations these are two linear equations in X
and Y and if you solve them you will see that the
point of intersection right here is 83 over 64 55
over 48 and then we can repeat the process using
this point now instead of the first one we can
figure out what is the tangent to the Fermata
curve and the lemniscate at this point namely
what R is this and what s is this plug those back
in there well it turns out that the Fermont curve
has tangent this one here and the lebanon sky
has tangent this one here and those two lines
will meet at this new point a3 so we can iterate
and if we keep going we're gonna get closer and
closer to that meet of the two algebraic curves
this is Newton's method applied to two algebraic
curves and they are not functions they're actually
algebraic curves so this is a more general and
somewhat more powerful method than the one
that's usually used and that usually found
in calculus texts now we're doing everything over
the rational numbers to give you a sense of the
numbers involved at the next iteration the value
of a3 looks like this it's already pretty big and
a4 is considerably bigger so to go further if
your computer can deal happily with these big
rational numbers fine otherwise practically if you
were doing yourself you would want to approximate
these numbers with decimal numbers and just work
with decimal numbers so for example with decimal
numbers the sixth one turns out to be something
like this this turns out to be accurate to three
decimal places the seventh one looks like this
that's accurate to six decimal places so we're
zooming in on this approximate point of course
there is no actual point where these two curves
meet we're only talking about approximations but
that's what we want to do in mathematics often we
just want to find an approximate place where
these two curves meet that's all that we can
do in fact okay so this is a rather advanced
application I'll give you an exercise if you
like and want to practice you can see if you
can find that other intersection point the
one down here using similar kind of technology
so the basic equations for the tangent planes
that I wrote down or the tangent lines in
the two-dimensional picture that's really
all that you need to generate this iteration
getting from one approximation to the next one
okay so that's reasonably sophisticated if
you've been able to follow that find if you
haven't don't worry too much next time we are
going to shift gears in a major way you can
see that I'm getting closer to wanting to do
calculus in a systematic way in fact I have
been doing a kind of a calculus for many
of the last few videos but we are getting
to the point now where we're bumping into the
calculus which is already there and I need to
address perhaps a painful issue that I've been
skirting up till now we have to face the fact
that modern analysis or modern calculus doesn't
really work logically and it's my responsibility
I suppose to set this argument out clearly and to
lay out the difficulties that are there my fellow
colleagues seem to be reluctant to take up this
challenge but it's very important that we admit
to the weaknesses that are in our subject
next time we're going to start the new part
of this course where we become a little bit more
aggressive and we aim our attention towards the
weaknesses in modern pure mathematics so rather
interesting can be challenging certainly going
to be controversial I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening